RFC: Observability Policy (#97)
Kuadrant/architecture: rfcs/0000-observability-api.md

# Observability configuration

- Feature Name: Observability configuration
- Start Date: 2024-07-22
- RFC PR: [Kuadrant/architecture#0000](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/0000)
- Issue tracking: [Kuadrant/architecture#0000](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This is a proposal for adding the ability to configure aspects of observability for Kuadrant as a whole to the already existing Kuadrant custom resource.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> Users of Kuadrant (Platform engineers and or Site reliability engineers) will want a way to be able to configure different aspects of observability for Kuadrant without having to configure things at the component level themselves. Providing users this ability allows them to not have to have a deep knowledge of the inner workings of the components as well as integrate Kuadrant observability pieces with their own observability stack or Openshift user workload monitoring. Resulting in a fully comprehensive observability view all configured in one location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users of Kuadrant (Platform engineers and or Site reliability engineers) will want a way to be able to configure different aspects of observability for Kuadrant without having to configure things at the component level themselves. Providing users this ability allows them to integrate Kuadrant observability pieces with their own observability stack or Openshift user workload monitoring without needing a deep knowledge of the inner workings of the components, resulting in a fully comprehensive observability view all configured in one location.
```

| Alerts *              | **namespace**, **enable**                                 |
| Dashboards *          | **namespace**, **enable**                                 |
| Other 3rd Party *     | e.g Kiali  **enable** bool                                |

###### **Note**: Observability pieces with a * denotes these are post v1 milestone
            

### Sample use case (With whats currently available)
A use case a user might have could be the following:

1. Setup tracing for the Kuadrant components Authorino and Limitador with the required endpoint and optional tag. 
2. Disable the creation of the service and serviceMonitors created by Kuadrant for the components and there operators
3. Configure logging for Authorino and Limitador. Note: For the first phase this is not available for the operators as they dont use the component CRs to implement new log levels flags/env-vars are used instead.

```yaml 

apiVersion: Kuadrant.io/v1alpha1
kind: kuadrant
spec:
  observability:
    tracing: 
        endpoint: rpc://tempo.tempo.svc.cluster.local:4317
        tags: tag1, tag2
    metrics: 
        enable: false
    logging:
      logLevel: debug      
```

### Status

> The status of the Kuadrant CR will not be the observability stack is in a "healthy" state i.e Prometheus and Grafana is up and running. It should be the status of only the things that we have control over. The status will show what components the user will have configured for example logging setup for Authorino and Limitador. We will not be taking responsibility for aspects we don't have control over. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The status of the Kuadrant CR will not be whether the observability stack is in a "healthy" state, i.e., Prometheus and Grafana is up and running. It should be the status of only the things that we have control over. The status will show what components the user have configured, for example, the logging setup for Authorino and Limitador. We will not be taking responsibility for aspects we don't have control over. 
```

#### Example status:

```yaml 
logging:
  authorino: debug
  limitador: debug
tracing:
  authorino: endpoint, tags
  limitador: endpoint, tags
metrics:
  disabled
```

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

In terms of how the information supplied in the Kuadrant CR will get passed to the other Kuadrant components, multiple options have been brought up:

- directly - like setting flags or configuration directly on the deployments of the different Kuadrant components.
- indirectly -  Passing the information to Authorino & Limitador via the Authorino & Limitador CRs

> - indirectly -  Passing the information to Authorino & Limitador in the form of there own Observability CRs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- indirectly -  Passing the information to Authorino & Limitador in the form of their own Observability CRs
```

> - directly - like setting flags or configuration directly on the deployments of the different Kuadrant components.
> - indirectly -  Passing the information to Authorino & Limitador via the Authorino & Limitador CRs
> - indirectly -  Passing the information to Authorino & Limitador in the form of there own Observability CRs
> 
> The best approach would be the indirect approach, meaning once the Kuadrant CR is updated, the information is passed to the relevant component CR. For example the tracing section in the Authorino CR spec would be updated with the required endpoints and other configuration from the Kuadrant CR. This does mean that the spec exposed is whats in the Kuadrant component CR's but new changes can be requested and implemented in said components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. directly - like setting flags or configuration directly on the deployments of the different Kuadrant components.
2. indirectly -  Passing the information to Authorino & Limitador via the Authorino & Limitador CRs
3.  indirectly -  Passing the information to Authorino & Limitador in the form of there own Observability CRs

The best approach would be the approach 2), an indirect approach, meaning once the Kuadrant CR is updated, the information is passed to the relevant component CR. For example, the tracing section in the Authorino CR spec would be updated with the required endpoints and other configuration from the Kuadrant CR. This does mean that the spec exposed is whats in the Kuadrant component CR's, but new changes can be requested and implemented in said components.
```

Maybe use a numbered list instead since the description seems to describe the first indirect approach specificially? 🤔

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

The above approach allows for the following:
* User experience: The observability configuration in the CR can be easily read to see what the current state of the observability configuration is. Also theres only one place to update rather then multiple.
* Single source of truth: Rather then having multiple CR's to check what the current configuration is theres a single source of truth. Preventing users from accidentally changing values by mistake

## Other options:
An other option that has been investigated which is very similar to above, is having observability configuration as its own API. The majority of the work itself would be largely the same with operators having to move configuration to the Kuadrant CR and having new observability features use the Kuadrant CR as the source of truth. 

The reason why we should not go with the above method is reliance. The Observability CR will rely on the Kuadrant CR being present and we moving away from that model. From a user point of view having a users have to change configuration in 3+ separate crs in some cases, is tedious and slow.

> If we don't decide to any of these options the user will have to manually in multiple places add there configuration of their desired observability stack which can result in poor user experience, mistakes being made and values not being tracked properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we don't decide to any of these options, the user will have to manually add the configuration of their desired observability stack in multiple places, which can result in poor user experience, mistakes being made and values not being tracked properly.
```

In terms of Adding, modifying and deleting values or no values. Adding a value to the Kuadrant level view populates the values to the relevant component CR's. If finer configuration is needed then another policy is created for said component. If values are deleted from the Kuadrant level policy they are also then deleted from the relevant components CR's but if a component level policy is in place that will remain. If there is a observability policy in place in the Kuadrant level and a value is changes in the component CR then it will get overridden by the Kuadrant level policy. If there is no values in the Kuadrant level policy and a user changes the component level CR the value will not get overridden but the user will have to be made aware if something is added at the Kuadrant level in the future it will be overridden.

**As of the time of writing this, no the original suggestion solves the issues we need right now.**

#### Work thats needed

> The indirect approach allows for not much if any changes to the Authorino operator and the Limitador operator etc. The bulk of the work that would be needed would be in the Kuadrant operator.
> 
> The changes will come into full affect through a phased approach due to the nature of some aspects not being available yet. The phased approach can follow the versioning syntax that k8s like v1beta1 or v1alpha1 and be portrayed in the CRD. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The indirect approach allows for few, if any, changes to the Authorino operator and the Limitador operator etc. The bulk of the work that would be needed would be in the Kuadrant operator.

The changes will come into full effect through a phased approach due to the nature of some aspects not being available yet. The phased approach can follow the versioning syntax that k8s like v1beta1 or v1alpha1 and be portrayed in the CRD. 
```

The reason why we should not go with the above method is reliance. The Observability CR will rely on the Kuadrant CR being present and we moving away from that model. From a user point of view having a users have to change configuration in 3+ separate crs in some cases, is tedious and slow.

If we don't decide to go with any of these options, the user will have to manually add the configuration of their desired observability stack in multiple places, which can result in poor user experience, mistakes being made and values not being tracked properly.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Manually adding configuration to Kuadrant operator crs.

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

Currently we only have configuration for Logging, Tracing and Metrics. Post v1 the plan is to add alerts, dashboards and potentially other 3rd party like Kiali.

> * For the logging piece this is currently only for Authorino and Limitador and not there operators or the Kuadrant operator as these require flags to be changed so in phase two we can look at what work needs to be done to make this cohesive. For example being able to change a config and that gets percolated down to all the components .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For the logging piece, this is currently only for Authorino and Limitador and not their operators or the Kuadrant operator as these require flags to be changed so in phase two we can look at what work needs to be done to make this cohesive. For example being able to change a config and that gets percolated down to all the components .
```

| Tracing               | Authorino operator, Limitador operator                    | **component** , **endpoint** , **tags**  , **insecure**, **strageyRules**  |
| Metrics               | Kuadrant operator, Authorino, Limitador, DNS Operator     | **component** , **enableService** , **port** , **deep**                                            |
| Alerts *              | Kuadrant operator, Authorino, Limitador                   | **namespace** , **component**, **enable**                                                                 |
| Dashboards *          | Kuadrant operator, Authorino, Limitador                   | **namespace** , **component**, **enable**                                                                 |
| Other 3rd Party *     | e.g Kiali                                                 | **enable** bool                                                                                                               |

###### **Note**: Observability pieces with a * denotes these are post v1 milestone

> ### Example CR with everything

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it would clarify expectations better if you say this example is an ideal example if every component had every option available, and was configurable via the same type of API?
Reiterating about the evolution of the spec via versioning could re-inforce that.
Perhaps a set of guidelines the spec could follow is enough at this stage (which is kind of what is shown anyways)

Author: Sure i can do that

```yaml 

apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1alpha1
kind: observability
spec:
      logging:
        component:
          authorino:

>             logLevel: debug

Reviewer 3: We should probably have the same property as standard rather than `logLevel` and `logMode`

Author: I can see now its not as obvious in the example. Loglevel and logmode are two separate options let me update that to make that more obvious

Author: Also see copy paste error to

          limitador: 
            logMode: debug
          authorino: 
            logMode: development
          limitador: 
            logMode: development  
    
    tracing:
      component:  
        limitador:
          endpoint: rpc://tempo.tempo.svc.cluster.local:4317
          insecure: true
          tags: tag1, tag2

>           strategyRules: 

Author: incorporating potential other RFC https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/96

Reviewer 2: Maybe a note to say this section will depend on work in that RFC?

Author: Sure ill add that in

            rule1:
              best-rule-in-the-world-1
            rule2:
              best-rule-in-the-world-2  
        authorino:
          endpont: rpc://tempo.tempo.svc.cluster.local:4317
          insecure: true
            tags: tag1, tag2
          strategyRules: 
            rule1:
              best-rule-in-the-world-1
            rule2:
              best-rule-in-the-world-2     

    metrics:
      component: 
        authorino: 
          enableService: true
          port: 8080
          deep: true
        authorino-operator:
          enableService: true
          port: 8080
        limitador:
          enableService: true
          port: 8080
          deep: false
        limitador-operator:
          enableService: true
          port: 8080
        kuadrant-operator:
          enableService: true 
          port: 8080
          deep: true
        dns-operator:
          enableService: true
          port: 8080   

    alerts:
      namespace: my-amazing-namespace
      component:
        authorino:

>           operator-level: true

Reviewer 2: lower camelCase field names would fit better with k8s standards

```suggestion
          operatorLevel: true
```

          component-level: true  

          
    dashboards:
      namespace: my-amazing-namespace
      component:
        authorino:
          operator-level: true
          component-level: true
        limitador:
          operator-level: true
          component-level: true  
        kuadrant:
          operator-level: true

            
```
### Sample use case
A use case a user might have would be they desire setting up tracing in the Limitador operator implementing the required endpoints and optional tag. The user also wants metrics setup with custom ports and requires service and serviceMonitors to be created for Kuadrant-operator and Authorino-operator as well as have the Authorino have a log level of Debug.

```yaml 

apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1alpha1
kind: Observability
spec:
  tracing:  
    component:
      limitador:
          endpoint: rpc://tempo.tempo.svc.cluster.local:4317
          tags: tag1, tag2
  metrics: 
    component:
      authorino: 
        enableService: true
        port: 8084
        deep: true 
      kuadrant:   
        enableService: true
        port: 8084 
  logging:
    component:
      authorino: 
        logLevel: debug      
```
### Status

> The status of the Observability CR will not be the observability stack is in a "healthy" state i.e Prometheus and Grafana is up and running. It should be the status of only the things that we contribute for example is new Logging and Tracing now in place or is the console plugin responding. We will not be taking responsibility for aspects we don't have control over. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The status of the Observability CR will not be the observability stack is in a "healthy" state i.e Prometheus and Grafana is up and running. It should be the status of only the things that we contribute for example is new Logging and Tracing now in place. We will not be taking responsibility for aspects we don't have control over. 
```
console plugin removed from spec

Author: Good catch i'll remove it

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

In terms of how the information supplied in the Observability CR will get passed to the other Kuadrant components, multiple options have been brought up:

directly - like setting flags or configuration directly on the deployments of the different Kuadrant components.
indirectly -  Passing the information to Authorino & limitador via the Authorino & Limitador CRs
indirectly -  Passing the information to Authorino & limitador in the form of there own Observability CRs

> The best approach would be the indirect approach, meaning once the Observability CR is updated the information is passed to the relevant component CR. For example the tracing section in the Authorino CR spec would be updated with the required endpoints and other configuration in the Observability CR, this would then be updated in the Authorino CR. 

Reviewer 2: Agreed.
The direct option could break easily when authorino or limitador change something in the deployment for example.
This does mean the available options that can be included in the Observability spec are limited to what's exposed via the Authorino & Limitador CRs (but changes can be requested)

Author: Yes that a good point to acknowledge

* Future proof: Observability currently is Logging, metrics and tracing but theres plans for more configuration. Having it has a standalone API allows for engineering to easily add new features.
* Single source of truth: Rather then having multiple crs to check what the current configuration is theres a single source of truth. Preventing users from accidentally changing values by mistake

## Other options:
An other option that has been investigated which is very similar to above, is having observability configuration as a element of the kuadrant CR spec. The majority of the work itself would be largely the same with operators having to move configuration to the Kuadrant CR and having new observability features use the kuadrant CR as the source of truth. 

> The reason why we should go with the above method is Abstraction. The Kuadrant CR quite quickly can get "muddied" with observability and be harder to read and maintain also losing its main purpose; being the install kick of and maintainer for the kuadrant operators as well as the single source of truth aspect. From a user point of view having a users have to change configuration in 3+ separate crs in some cases is tedious and not slow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The reason why we should go with the above method is Abstraction. The Kuadrant CR quite quickly can get "muddied" with observability and be harder to read and maintain also losing its main purpose; being the install kick of and maintainer for the kuadrant operators as well as the single source of truth aspect. From a user point of view having a users have to change configuration in 3+ separate crs in some cases is tedious and slow.
```

#### Adding, modifying and deleting values or no values

If a values is being configure either being added, modified or removed all changes will have to be made in the Observability CR. If the component level operators are updated to change these values without the Observability CR being changed they will be overridden back to the source of truth the Observability CR provides. 

If the value is removed from the Observability CR it will also be removed from the relevant component CRs. If the value is removed from the component CR but not the Observability CR it will be overridden and added back. 

# Unresolved questions

1. Do we want a value where a person just wants everything "on", they want all the observing. Where a value a the root of the observability section can be set to say give me all you got?

> 2. Do we go with a observability policy instead of the proposed configuration style CR like whats being suggested? TLDR of what that would look like is quite similar to the observability CR in the fact that the observability piece is pulled out but instead of there just being one source of truth with the current method, and having the fine grained capabilities be in the one location. Instead you would have for most use cases a single observability policy that would be attached at the Kuadrant component level, in there you would have a Kuadrant level view i.e if i enable tracing here its enabled for all the components that can handle it. From there if a component needs some special configuration a separate policy can be created and attached to that specific component instead. 

Author: @Boomatang Does that cover for the most part what we were discussing this morning?

Author: Im now leaning to this solution being the one to go with but want to get other peoples thoughts before i write a full rfc on it

Reviewer 4: I think that covers what we talked about.

> # RFC Template

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
# Observability API
```
